Hermetic build documentation (#146)
redhat-appstudio/docs.appstudio.io: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-to-guides/proc_hermetic-builds.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

[id="hermetic-builds_{context}"]
= Enabling hermetic builds

> Hermetic builds refer to a controlled build process where all required resources and dependencies are declared and prefetched within a build system. This strict control ensures that the build system has complete visibility and control over the dependencies needed for the build, including the ability to accurately collect, inquire, analyze, and manage all dependencies during the build process. By restricting external dependencies and implementing a centralized management approach, hermetic builds provide a predictable and reliable build environment.

Reviewer: Are you trying to be general here or specific to {ProductName}? If being generic, I don't think the first sentence is quite accurate, instead something like this may be better

```suggestion
Hermetic builds refer to a controlled build process where all required resources and dependencies are completely known by a build system. This dependency visibility ensures that the build system can accurately collect, inquire, analyze, and manage all dependencies during the build process.
In {ProductName}, hermetic builds are achieved by blocking network access to the build itself, so all dependencies must be pre-fetched in order to be available at build time.
```

I just removed the last sentence. If you like it, that may fit better elsewhere. I also introduced network isolation as you just state that it is happening later without connecting it to hermetic builds.

> IMPORTANT: If you do not vendor all the required dependencies in a git repository while isolated from the network, your build may fail. 

Reviewer: I like how the NOTE below is worded in its context more so than this note. It introduces a good concept -- that additional user work may be needed to enable hermetic builds because of the network isolation. Maybe we can just change what we are trying to say here to stay general.

> Hermetic builds also focus on establishing a build pipeline that captures and maintains a precise record of the build’s origin, dependencies, and modifications. This emphasis on provenance allows for better traceability, reproducibility, and auditability of the build process. By having comprehensive visibility into the entire pipeline, hermetic builds enable the identification and resolution of issues, facilitate collaboration, and support long-term maintenance of the builds.

Reviewer: I am not sure what you are trying to say in these sentences. Don't we already define why provenance is important to us when discussing SLSA? Can we just link over to that to give more background on it? We can briefly introduce the connection here before linking, but defer to the other page for details.

.Prerequisites

> * You have an upgraded build pipeline.

Reviewer: Can you link to this documentation?

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

[id="hermetic-builds_{context}"]
= Enabling hermetic builds

Hermetic builds refer to a controlled build process in which a build system knows all the required resources and dependencies. This dependency visibility ensures that the build system can accurately collect, inquire, analyze, and manage all dependencies during the build process.

In {ProductName}, hermetic builds are achieved by blocking network access to the build process. This means that all the dependencies must be pre-fetched before the build can start.

> IMPORTANT: If you do not vendor all the required dependencies in a git repository before blocking network access, your build may fail. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: If you do not specify all the required dependencies in a git repository before blocking network access, your build may fail. 
```

Reviewer 2: "Vendoring" sometimes suggests that the dependencies are _copied_ into your git repo, which is not always the case, not always desired, and anyways isn't _required_ by our system.

Reviewer: The point here is that if you do not have all dependencies in the git repository that enabling hermetic (not talking about pre-fetch yet) will cause the build to fail. It is more than specifying at this point. Specifying is for later with the pre-fetch functionality.

Reviewer 3: To me this make vendoring look like the default recommendation to make hermetic builds work in RHTAP.

I don't think vendoring should be a recommendation at all, unless we're happy to rely on syft for the SBOM generation in those cases

Hermetic builds also focus on establishing a build pipeline that captures and maintains a precise record of the build's origin, dependencies, and modifications. For more information on the importance of provenance, see link:https://redhat-appstudio.github.io/docs.appstudio.io/Documentation/main/concepts/slsa/con_slsa-conformity/[Supply chain security through SLSA conformity].

.Prerequisites

> * You have an link:https://redhat-appstudio.github.io/docs.appstudio.io/Documentation/main/how-to-guides/configuring-builds/proc_upgrade_build_pipeline/[upgraded build pipeline].

Reviewer: Do you want to replicate this link in the requirements on the Cach2 prefetch page as well?

.Procedure

For each component that you want to build hermetically:

. Navigate to your component’s source code.

. Open the *.tekton* directory and locate the *.yaml* files related to the *pull-request* and *push* processes.

> . *Configure the hermetic pipeline*: In both the *.yaml* files, add the following hermetic pipeline parameters.

Reviewer 4: What should they do after "adding it"? Is it reasonable to assume the user knows to commit that change or create a PR to see if it works and have something to look at in the Verify step?

+
[source,yaml]
----

> param:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
params:
```
In my pipeline definitions, it's params, not param.

Reviewer 4: Should they be modifying this section? or the default value earlier in the definition? If the params: section, they would be replacing `value: $(params.hermetic)` with true, it's already there, just defaults to false.

Reviewer: I think it makes sense to change the spec.params as that is easier to find and all parameters are colocated at the top.

Author: @arewm So I have to update `params` to `spec.params`, right?

    -  name: hermetic
       value: “true”
----

+

> NOTE: If you add this parameter in a non-java application, that is a link:https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/blob/main/task/buildah/0.1/buildah.yaml[Buildah] task, the build is automatically isolated from the network. This is because all the necessary dependencies are included in a git repository. However, if you want to restrict external network access during the build process, you can pre-fetch package manager dependencies for the supported languages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you add this parameter in a non-java application, that is a link:https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/blob/main/task/buildah/0.1/buildah.yaml[Buildah] task, the build is automatically isolated from the network and will only be able to build from contents directly in your git repository. If you need to pull in dependencies from a package manager for one of the supported languages, follow the separate set of steps to link:https://redhat-appstudio.github.io/docs.appstudio.io/Documentation/main/how-to-guides/proc_prefetching-dependencies-to-support-hermetic-build/[configure pre-fetching of dependencies] before the build step.
```

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:myfunctionone: hermetic_builds

[id="hermetic-builds_{context}"]
= Enabling hermetic builds

> Hermetic builds refer to a controlled build process in which a build system knows all the required resources and dependencies. This dependency visibility ensures that the build system can accurately collect, inquire, analyze, and manage all dependencies during the build process.
> 
> In {ProductName}, hermetic builds are achieved by blocking network access to the build process. Therefore, you must pre-fetch all dependencies before the build can start.
> 
> IMPORTANT: Hermetic builds disable network access, so the builds that require dependencies outside of its Git repository could fail. 
> 
> Hermetic builds also focus on establishing a build pipeline that captures and maintains a precise record of the build's origin, dependencies, and modifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hermetic builds refer to a controlled build process in which a build system knows all the required resources and dependencies. This enhanced dependency visibility allows the build system to capture and produce a more precise record of the build's origin, dependencies, and modifications than it would otherwise be able to.

In {ProductName}, hermetic builds are achieved by blocking network access to the build process. Therefore, you must pre-fetch all dependencies before the build can start.

IMPORTANT: Hermetic builds disable network access, so the builds that require dependencies outside of its Git repository could fail. 
```

Reviewer 2: Just stylistic. The last sentence seemed to be partly duplicating stuff from the first paragraph. I tried to incorporate it into the first.

Take it or leave it. Not critical. :)

.Procedure

To create a hermetic build for a component, complete the following steps:

. Go to your component’s source code.

. Open the *.tekton* directory and locate the *.yaml* files related to the *pull-request* and *push* processes.

. Configure the hermetic pipeline by adding the following hermetic pipeline parameters in both the *.yaml* files:

+
[source,yaml]
----
spec:
    params:
        -   ...
        -   name: hermetic
            value: “true”
----

+
NOTE: In a non-java application, that is a link:https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/build-definitions/blob/main/task/buildah/0.1/buildah.yaml[Buildah] task, adding the parameter mentioned above automatically isolates the build from the network, restricting it to only build from dependencies listed in your Git repository. If you need to pull in dependencies from a package manager for one of the xref:how-to-guides/proc_prefetching-dependencies-to-support-hermetic-build.adoc#supported-languages[supported languages], see xref:how-to-guides/proc_prefetching-dependencies-to-support-hermetic-build.adoc[Prefetching the package manager dependencies for the Hermetic build].

> . Commit your changes to the repository of the component.

Reviewer 4: Same comment here as below, about commit ambiguity.
